Embryonic stem cells (ESCs), derived from the inner cell mass of pre-implantation embryos, have been recognized as the most pluripotent stem cell population.
Human ES cells (hESCs) can be maintained and propagated on mouse or human fibroblast feeders for extended periods in media containing basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) [1-4] while retaining the ability to differentiate into ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm as well as trophoectoderm and germ cells.
Gene expression in hESC has been investigated by a variety of techniques including massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS), serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE), expressed sequence tag (EST) scan, large scale microarrays, focused cDNA microarrays, and immunocytochemistry [5-7].
Markers for hESCs that may also contribute to the "stemness" phenotype have been established and markers that distinguish ESCs from embryoid bodies (EB) have been developed.
Novel stage-specific genes that distinguish between hESCs and EBs have been identified and allelic differences between ESC have begun to be recognized [8-10].
As the potential of hESCs and their derivatives for regenerative medicine is being evaluated, it has become clear that the overall state of the cells, degree of contamination and comparisons of the more than a hundred different newly derived lines will need to be performed.
It will be necessary to develop methods to monitor and assess hESC and their derivatives on a routine basis.
Since differentiated cells are often scattered within or at the edge of colonies [11] and the differentiation is so subtle that morphological characteristics and even immunohistochemistry are insufficient to detect it, larger scale methods of analysis need to be developed.
Our strategy was to compare a variety of different hESC lines that were derived and expanded by three different institutions (WiCell Research Institute, BresaGen, Inc., and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology), and cultured in two separate laboratories (Burnham Institute and NIA) to a baseline set of data against which cell samples can be compared.
By using cells grown in different conditions we expected to be able to identify core commonalities and by comparing feeders and embryoid bodies (EB) with hESC identify measures of contamination and early markers of differentiation.
Further, by comparing embryonal carcinoma cell (EC) and karyotypically variant lines with hESC, we would be able to directly assess their utility as surrogates (for quality control purposes) for hESC.
We employed a pre-commercial prototype of the Illumina HumanRef-8 BeadChip [12], a genome-scale bead based array technology that combines the sensitivity and low cost of a focused array with the coverage of a large scale array, while requiring much smaller sample sizes than MPSS, EST scan or SAGE.
We show that the Illumina bead based array correctly identified blinded duplicates as the closest related samples and readily distinguished between hESC lines, as well as between ESCs and EBs derived from them.
This array allowed us to estimate the degree of feeder contamination present in the cultures.
Similarities and differences between EC line NTera2 and hESC lines could be determined and verified, and the database comparisons allowed us to identify core self-renewal pathways that regulate hESC propagation.